Carly Fiorina likes to joke that she used to be “really unemployable”. The Republican presidential hopeful graduated from Stanford University with a degree in medieval history and philosophy, after which she went to law school. She hated it so much, she quit after a single semester. Eventually, Fiorina got a job as a receptionist: typing, filing and answering the phone.

“I had no idea what I was going to do with my life,” she said earlier this year. “I was just trying to pay the rent.”

Fast forward 40 years and Fiorina is pitching herself as the great Republican hope for 2016. After a polished performance in Wednesday’s CNN debate, the 61-year-old former Hewlett-Packard chief executive from North Virginia has electrified the presidential campaign.

As the only rightwing woman in the running, Fiorina already stands out. But it was her calmly executed take-down of Donald Trump, who has seemed unassailable over the last few months, that has ensured Fiorina’s rocketing popularity. On the night of the debate, she gained 19,000 Twitter followers, many of whom would not consider themselves natural Republican voters. Trump, by contrast, put on a comparatively measly 10,000.

“She’s catching fire,” says Nancy Cook, the economic and domestic policy correspondent for National Journal who interviewed Fiorina in February. “Her performance at the debate didn’t surprise me at all. She’s a really great detail politician and I say that in a non-partisan way. She’s very good at talking to people, connecting with them.

“When I was following her, she resonated with audiences because she talks about gender discrimination, about being a political outsider and people can relate to that. Also, she’s the only woman on a stage full of guys.”

Her gender has certainly been a notable talking point. In a recent interview with Rolling Stone magazine, Donald Trump, never a man shy of using one insult where several dozen will do, took issue with Fiorina’s face.

“Look at that face! Would anyone vote for that?” Trump was quoted as saying when he saw Fiorina on television. “Can you imagine that, the face of our next president?”

Fiorina’s response was both classy and calculated: her campaign team put out a web ad called “Look at This Face” which interspersed images of women from across the country with Fiorina speaking at a Republican women’s event, set to a swelling soundtrack of uplifting piano music.

“Ladies, look at this face and look at all of your faces: the face of leadership,” Fiorina says in the ad. “This is the face of a 61-year-old woman. I am proud of every year and every wrinkle.”

The ad’s cleverness lay in not referring directly to Trump’s comments. As a result, Fiorina seemed to rise effortlessly above the fray. She looked like an adult placing a truculent child on the naughty step and in doing so, she broadened her appeal to all women, not just the Republican GOP. “I mean, I think she’s awful and I don’t agree with a single one of her policies,” says one lifelong female Democrat voter. “But I looked at that ad and I found it really moving and I thought: ‘Yeah, she killed it.’”

During Wednesday’s debate, Fiorina had the crispest answers, punctuated by specific policy points, and delivered with a fluency that made the other candidates look unprepared and blustering. In an attempt to show herself equally as hawkish as the men on stage, she insisted she would not negotiate with Vladimir Putin and would ensure that the US military had 50 army brigades, 36 marine battalions and more than 300 naval ships to combat the global scourge of Isis.

But she got one of the biggest cheers of the night when asked by the host to respond to the Rolling Stone article.

“I think women all over this country heard very clearly what Mr Trump said,” Fiorina replied, looking straight down the camera lens.

“Doubtless, it was a line that Fiorina had rehearsed, but she delivered it beautifully,” wrote John Cassidy of the New Yorker. “Trump, for once, seemed somewhat at a loss for words.”

For many, this is the key to Fiorina’s success: she is the antidote to the Trump virus, one of the only people capable of reducing the New York multimillionaire property magnate to silence and of landing a blow where other candidates have tried and failed.

This, in spite of the fact she has never held elected office. Her putative 2010 bid for the California Senate failed when she was defeated by the Democratic incumbent, Barbara Boxer. Fiorina, like Trump, insists her lack of experience in elected office is a strength rather than a weakness and paints herself as an outsider who can shake up a stagnating political system.

According to some of her friends, she had little interest in politics until well into adulthood. Her first husband was quoted in an interview a few years back saying that, when they were married, Fiorina had “no opinions”.

And it was as a businesswoman that she first made her mark. After her stint as a receptionist, Fiorina got an MBA from the University of Maryland and spent 20 years in sales, marketing and strategy for various telecommunications giants. By 1999, she was chief executive of Hewlett-Packard, becoming the first woman in charge of a Fortune 20 Company. Fiorina once said “the glass ceiling doesn’t exist” but perhaps it was that she refused to believe in it.

Her tenure at Hewlett-Packard was not an unalloyed triumph. The stock price dropped by more than 50% during that time and, in February 2005, she was fired by the board. She left with a $21m severance package, took some time off to write a memoir (Tough Choices, not to be confused with Hillary Clinton’s later magnum opus, Hard Choices) and in 2008 became an adviser for John McCain’s presidential campaign.

She found she liked the public-facing interaction of politics. “I’ve always drawn my energy from people,” she told Nancy Cook of the National Journal earlier this year. “I find it really fascinating and interesting and fun to be able to be out there and talking about what is going on in their lives,”

But her professional trajectory has not been without its personal challenges. In 2009, she was diagnosed with breast cancer and had to undergo chemotherapy. That same year, her 35-year-old step-daughter Lori with her second husband, Frank, died alone in her apartment after a long struggle with drug addiction and bulimia – a traumatic incident Fiorina referred to during last week’s debate.

It was a moment amid all the heated political discourse that made Fiorina, who can sometimes appear robotic, seem more human. But David Karol, an associate professor of government and politics at the University of Maryland, cautions against believing the hype.

“She has some strengths in communication but basically, on the issues, she’s a generic Republican,” he says, pointing out that Fiorina is pro-life, opposes same-sex marriage and is against government action on climate change. “Right now people aren’t focusing on that because they’re all Republicans, but in a general election, they will.”

Whether her success on-screen translates to wider popular appeal over the coming months remains to be seen. But one thing remains certain: Carly Fiorina is more than just “that face”.

